whats new in ef9 - migrations (#4828)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/managing-schemas/migrations/applying.md

It's possible for the application itself to apply migrations programmatically, typically during startup. While productive for local development and testing of migrations, this approach is inappropriate for managing production databases, for the following reasons:

> * On version of EF prior to 9, if multiple instances of your application are running, both applications could attempt to apply the migration concurrently and fail (or worse, cause data corruption).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For versions of EF prior to 9, if multiple instances of your application are running, both applications could attempt to apply the migration concurrently and fail (or worse, cause data corruption).
```

* It's important to be able to roll back an applied migration in case of an issue. The other strategies provide this easily and out of the box.
* The SQL commands are applied directly by the program, without giving the developer a chance to inspect or modify them. This can be dangerous in a production environment.

> [!NOTE]

> > EF9 introduced migration locking, which protects against multiple migrations happening simultaneously. However, other problems listed above are relevant and as such applying migration at runtime is still strongly discouraged in production.

Reviewer 2: I'd maybe make the wording a bit softer (e.g. remove `strongly`).. I think that once locking is implemented, doing this is maybe not that bad (we can discuss what our policy/recommendation is).

In any case, I'd add "On version of EF prior to 9, " at the start of the first bullet point above.

>
> * Carefully consider before using this approach in production. Experience has shown that the simplicity of this deployment strategy is outweighed by the issues it creates. Consider generating SQL scripts from migrations instead.
> * Don't call `EnsureCreated()` before `Migrate()`. `EnsureCreated()` bypasses Migrations to create the schema, which causes `Migrate()` to fail.

## Migration locking

> EF9 introduced a locking mechanism when executing migrations. It aims to protect against multiple migration executions happening simultaneously, as that could leave the database in a corrupted state. This is one of the potential problems resulting from applying migrations at runtime using [`DbContext.Database.Migrate()`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.relationaldatabasefacadeextensions.migrate) method. To mitigate this, EF will create an exclusive lock on the database before any migration operations are applied. The lock is released when the migration completes. The locking mechanism used depends on the underlying database provider. On SQL Server, EF takes advantage of the database built-in locking mechanism using stored procedures `sp_getapplock` and `sp_releaseapplock`. Sqlite lacks such mechanism, so instead EF creates a separate table (`__EFMigrationsLock`) and uses it for locking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EF9 introduced a locking mechanism when executing migrations. It aims to protect against multiple migration executions happening simultaneously, as that could leave the database in a corrupted state. This is one of the potential problems resulting from applying migrations at runtime using [`DbContext.Database.Migrate()`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.relationaldatabasefacadeextensions.migrate) method. To mitigate this, EF will create an exclusive lock on the database before any migration operations are applied. The lock is released when the migration completes and the seeding code finishes execution. The locking mechanism used depends on the underlying database provider. On SQL Server, EF takes advantage of the database built-in locking mechanism using stored procedures `sp_getapplock` and `sp_releaseapplock`. Sqlite lacks such mechanism, so instead EF creates a separate table (`__EFMigrationsLock`) and uses it for locking.
```

Reviewer: Probably best to move the Sqlite info to the paragraph below

>
> * Carefully consider before using this approach in production. Experience has shown that the simplicity of this deployment strategy is outweighed by the issues it creates. Consider generating SQL scripts from migrations instead.
> * Don't call `EnsureCreated()` before `Migrate()`. `EnsureCreated()` bypasses Migrations to create the schema, which causes `Migrate()` to fail.

> ## Migration locking

Author: is this the right place to put the extra info? @AndriySvyryd

Reviewer 2: @maumar do we think users need to know about the migration lock, and the implementation difference between SQLite and SQL Server? I do think it makes sense to have a "what's new" section on it (because it's a new feature), but I'm not sure why a user using migrations should need to know that the migration lock exists or how it works...

In contrast, further up on this page there are warnings against using Migrate() because of concurrency on startup - that's exactly what the migration lock fixes, so we should look at amending the page to not scare people away from Migrate() (when using 9.0 and above).

Author: sounds good, I removed the details section and added a short note instead

Author: ended up removing most of the superfluous info, but left some around. Added a documentation note on what to do when lock doesn't get lifted on sqlite (due to failed transaction). User needs to manually drop the migration lock table, so little info adds some context why user needs to do this
